README.md, before:

# /architect

A Claude Code skill for building software projects through a staged methodology that prevents the #1 AI coding failure: losing context on a big plan and missing pieces.

## Prerequisites

None. This skill is pure methodology — no external tools or API keys required.

## Install

```bash
claude skill add --url https://github.com/wwwcolorcolor/architect-skill
```

Verify it installed:

```bash
claude skill list
```

## Usage

```
/architect               — start a new project or resume an existing one
/architect <description> — assess scope and begin planning
/architect resume        — pick up where you left off
```

### Examples

```
/architect a CLI tool that syncs local files to S3
/architect resume
/architect I want to build a multiplayer drawing app with websockets
```

## What it does

Drives projects through a structured lifecycle:

1. **Technical Spike** — validate the riskiest assumption before writing any code
2. **Design Notes** — collaborative domain-by-domain planning (no code yet)
3. **Build Planning** — dependency graph, stage sequencing
4. **Stage-by-Stage Execution** — write 2-3 stage docs ahead, build, verify, repeat

Each stage is small enough to hold entirely in context, execute correctly, and validate before moving on.

## Scaling

Automatically adapts to project scope:

- **Light** (1-2 files) — quick spike + minimal stages
- **Standard** (3-8 stages) — full methodology
- **Heavy** (8+ stages) — milestone grouping with review boundaries

## What gets created

```
project/
├── PROJECT_STATE.md        # Current snapshot (machine-readable)
├── notes/                  # Design notes per domain
│   ├── _index.md
│   └── ...
├── build_plan/             # Stage documents
│   ├── _build-order.md
│   └── stage-NN-*.md
├── src/                    # Code (built stage by stage)
└── tests/                  # Tests (grow with each stage)
```

## How it prevents context loss

The core rule: never work from one giant plan. Atomize into stages small enough to hold entirely in context. Stage documents are written 2-3 at a time (not all upfront) because later stages written before earlier stages are built are based on assumptions that will be wrong.

If something breaks mid-build, the methodology has explicit protocols for going back, fixing, and propagating changes through dependent stages.

Commit message:

Align with notebook skill — use notebook/ instead of notes/
- Rename notes/ to notebook/ for compatibility with /notebook skill
- Add lessons.md to project structure (anti-loop cheat sheet)
- Add lesson capture during stage execution
- Read lessons.md on resume protocol
- Document /notebook compatibility in README

README.md, after:

# /architect

A Claude Code skill for building software projects through a staged methodology that prevents the #1 AI coding failure: losing context on a big plan and missing pieces.

## Prerequisites

None. This skill is pure methodology — no external tools or API keys required.

## Install

```bash
claude skill add --url https://github.com/wwwcolorcolor/architect-skill
```

Verify it installed:

```bash
claude skill list
```

## Usage

```
/architect               — start a new project or resume an existing one
/architect <description> — assess scope and begin planning
/architect resume        — pick up where you left off
```

### Examples

```
/architect a CLI tool that syncs local files to S3
/architect resume
/architect I want to build a multiplayer drawing app with websockets
```

## What it does

Drives projects through a structured lifecycle:

1. **Technical Spike** — validate the riskiest assumption before writing any code
2. **Design Notes** — collaborative domain-by-domain planning (no code yet)
3. **Build Planning** — dependency graph, stage sequencing
4. **Stage-by-Stage Execution** — write 2-3 stage docs ahead, build, verify, repeat

Each stage is small enough to hold entirely in context, execute correctly, and validate before moving on.

## Scaling

Automatically adapts to project scope:

- **Light** (1-2 files) — quick spike + minimal stages
- **Standard** (3-8 stages) — full methodology
- **Heavy** (8+ stages) — milestone grouping with review boundaries

## What gets created

```
project/
├── PROJECT_STATE.md        # Current snapshot (machine-readable)
├── notebook/               # Design notes, lessons (compatible with /notebook skill)
│   ├── _index.md           # Rich index of all notes
│   ├── lessons.md          # Anti-loop cheat sheet — failures and gotchas
│   └── ...
├── build_plan/             # Stage documents
│   ├── _build-order.md
│   └── stage-NN-*.md
├── src/                    # Code (built stage by stage)
└── tests/                  # Tests (grow with each stage)
```

## How it prevents context loss

The core rule: never work from one giant plan. Atomize into stages small enough to hold entirely in context. Stage documents are written 2-3 at a time (not all upfront) because later stages written before earlier stages are built are based on assumptions that will be wrong.

If something breaks mid-build, the methodology has explicit protocols for going back, fixing, and propagating changes through dependent stages.

## Works with /notebook

Architect uses the same `notebook/` folder as the [notebook skill](https://github.com/wwwcolorcolor/notebook-skill). If you have both installed, `/save` works seamlessly inside architect projects to capture failures and lessons during the build phase. If you only have architect, the notes infrastructure is built in — notebook is not required.
